Organiser-Advice/virtual-meetups.md, before:

# Running virtual meetups

Here are some tips from the [Umbraco London](https://www.meetup.com/The-London-Umbraco-Meetup/) organisers on running virtual meetups.

## Format

We have three different types of meetup: formal (with talks), open-space (discussions), and social.

### Formal meetups

At the London in person formal meetups we usually have two talks of around 40 minutes. We felt that was too passive for a virtual meetup and instead prefer having two shorter talks, or just one long one.

It's important to leave time for some good questions and conversations between talks – it's a shame to have to cut things short if you have too much planned – and this helps keep attendees engaged.

### Open-space meetups

We are planning our first virtual open-space meetup in July, and shall report back afterwards on how it went!

### Social meetups

Our in person social meetups don't need planning, beyond a venue, to be a success. Virtual ones however can really benefit from having an agenda (itinerary) to give the meetup some structure and boundaries. Perhaps promote the event as as safe space for asking any tech question, or plan a group activity.

### News

We always start with any Umbraco news that has happened since the last meetup.

Rather than a long list of bullet points covering everything, how about focusing on three things that you find most interesting and go into detail on those.

If you're in need of some inspiration for topics, the monthly [Skrift Newsletter](https://bit.ly/skrift59-5) and the weekly [UmbraCoffee](https://www.youtube.com/umbracoffee) series are good sources.

Remember, your audience may not actually know that much about Umbraco so you might need to take some time to explain things in a way that will keep everyone engaged. Saying "Niels Hartvig, the founder of Umbraco" is a much a friendlier approach than just referring to him as "Niels". This is appropriate for in person meetups too of course, it's something we need to keep reminding ourselves!

## Tools

Zoom is the defacto choice for running a virtual meetup. The free accounts have a limit of 40 minutes, whereas 'pro' accounts can host up to 100 attendees without time limitations.

Umbraco HQ have an 'pro' account that can be used for running meetups. Reach out to Ilham Boulghallat on the community Slack around 1 week in advance of your meetup if you would like to use HQ's Zoom.

## Preparations

Virtual events don't have to be limited to your regular local attendees - Umbracians from all over the world can join!

Plan a date with at least a couple of weeks notice and begin promoting as soon as you can. Share your meetup on Twitter, LinkedIn, the community Slack, and other channels for the widest reach. If you don't promote your event, you aren't going to get people to attend. 

Check the meetup.com [events calendar](https://www.meetup.com/pro/umbraco) to ensure there's nothing conflicting with your chosen date and time.

### Scheduling

When creating a meeting on Zoom make sure:

- The correct date and time have been set
- The meeting has a password
- The waiting room is enabled _(advanced settings)_
- Participants are "muted on entering" _(advanced settings)_

It is important not to share your Zoom URL in the public domain! Be careful to share the link with only those you trust, and not on public social media or in the description of your meetup.

Meetup.com provides a safe way to share the link with your attendees; selecting the "Make this an online event" checkbox will reveal a "online meetup URL" textbox which is only displayed to registered attendees.

## On the day

It is a good idea to email people on the day of the meetup with the joining information, plus a reminder that they must not share the link with anyone else or post it online.

### Preparing the Zoom call

- Start the call early with the waiting room enabled so you can make sure that you and the other organisers are ready before letting everyone else in.
- Make sure that all organisers are set as 'co-hosts'. If you organise meetups on your own, ask a couple of trusted community members to co-host with you as it is so much easier to have a few of you monitoring what's going on.
- Make sure that you have disabled annotations, screen-sharing, whiteboard, and participants renaming themselves: all these tools have been used for nefarious purposes by 'Zoom bombers'. Of course if your meeting url never makes it into the public domain then you shouldn't have any problems but it is a good idea to be prepared in case it does. Do you know where the 'remove' option is just in case you need to kick someone out? Note that if you remove someone they cannot rejoin so don't try this on someone who should be there!
- It is useful for people, especially first-timers, to know who the meetup organisers are on the call. An easy way to achieve this is to add ' - organiser' to your Zoom name. Co-hosts can change their own name even if you've disabled this for participants.  
- Ideally all the organisers should be visible and aware of what's happening during the call, but if that's not possible, make sure at least one of you is at all times.

### Starting the meetup

When people join the call it can be disconcerting if nothing is happening and everyone is quiet. One option is to have started a screen-share before you let people in, with a slide welcoming people to the meetup and informing them that you'll be starting in a few minutes.

We prefer to instigate some informal chat with people as they join us. It can help to set a friendly, welcoming tone to the event. If you have lots of participants it might be easier to keep everyone else on mute and just you the organisers have a chat as people arrive.

### A friendly introduction

As part of our introduction we like to get everyone to say a quick hello, tell us their name and where they are. We've had people join from the US, South Africa and other parts of the UK so it is interesting to hear where they are joining from. Perhaps also ask people to say if it's their first time at your meetup, so you can all give a quick cheer to welcome them.

You do need to make it clear that it is a quick hello and not much more. If people start doing full introductions then it can go on far too long! You can't tell people to say hello in order, as the sequence on screen and in the participants list is different for everyone.

We find it works best when one of the organisers invites each person to speak. Without such direction you will either have silence, or people talking over each other. It's easy to miss someone out, so do remember to ask at the end if you've done that!

If you have lots of people on the call then this won't really viable, and instead you could select just a few people to talk to. Perhaps ask people to raise their hand if they're new, or from abroad, and then ask them to say hello. Of course it is completely up to you how you handle all this, but we've had some feedback that people really appreciated being invited to say something, as otherwise they would have left at the end without ever un-muting themselves.

### Helping speakers

Before you're about to hand over to your speaker, make them a co-host of the meeting so that they can share their screen. Ask your attendees to keep their videos on if they don't mind, as it helps the speakers to see engaged faces as they talk.

Usually you'll want to mute everyone before the speaker starts, it's always a good idea to tell people you're doing that so they know you've done it. Some speakers prefer having people un-muted, so it's best to check with them.

At the point you hand over to the speakers for a screen share, spot light them.  This helps attendees focus on the speaker, and helps anyone who lips read find the speaker easily to see what the speaker is saying.  It also has the benefit of attendees easily seeing the speaker demo via the camera, for example when demoing with physical devices such as Alexa.

If people have questions then it's usually easiest to ask them to post it in the Zoom chat. As the organiser you should be in charge of reading out the questions at the end, don't make the speaker scroll through the chat themselves!

### Recording

We haven't been recording the London meetups as we know this puts some people off from attending. We also want to encourage as many people to turn up as possible.

There are perhaps times where you wish to record a specific talk or segment of your meetup. Be sure to warn your attendees before you start the recording so people can switch off their video if they wish.

There is an [Umbraco Community YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCIMCVKFTnLBJPkbkIez4IzQ) that meetup videos can be published to. Find Arnold Visser on the community Slack for help with that.

### Finishing the meetup

It's a good idea to have a formal end to the meetup, no doubt to say some thank yous and to remind people when the next meetup is.

If you want to stay on the call and have some informal chat then make it known that people can stay on for that, but that they're welcome to leave. This stops people feeling rude if they do want to go!

## Any other tips?

If you have any other suggestions for things that have worked well on a virtual meetup we'd love to hear them: [@umbLondon](https://twitter.com/umblondon) on Twitter (DMs are open), email <hello@umblondon.co.uk>, or let [Callum](https://twitter.com/callumbwhyte), [Lotte](https://twitter.com/lottepitcher) or [Ravi](https://twitter.com/ravimotha) know (all on the community Slack). 

We're keen to get back to in person meetups when we're allowed to, but we will certainly consider adding some online meetups to our schedules...

Commit message:

Updated following a what went well/ what didn't go well review following between the organisers of the Umbraco Manchester Meetup

Organiser-Advice/virtual-meetups.md, after:

# Running virtual meetups

Here are some tips from the [Umbraco London](https://www.meetup.com/The-London-Umbraco-Meetup/) organisers on running virtual meetups.

## Format

We have three different types of meetup: formal (with talks), open-space (discussions), and social.

### Formal meetups

At the London in person formal meetups we usually have two talks of around 40 minutes. We felt that was too passive for a virtual meetup and instead prefer having two shorter talks, or just one long one.

It's important to leave time for some good questions and conversations between talks – it's a shame to have to cut things short if you have too much planned – and this helps keep attendees engaged.

### Open-space meetups

We are planning our first virtual open-space meetup in July, and shall report back afterwards on how it went!

### Social meetups

Our in person social meetups don't need planning, beyond a venue, to be a success. Virtual ones however can really benefit from having an agenda (itinerary) to give the meetup some structure and boundaries. Perhaps promote the event as as safe space for asking any tech question, or plan a group activity.

### News

We always start with any Umbraco news that has happened since the last meetup.

Rather than a long list of bullet points covering everything, how about focusing on three things that you find most interesting and go into detail on those.

If you're in need of some inspiration for topics, the monthly [Skrift Newsletter](https://bit.ly/skrift59-5) and the weekly [UmbraCoffee](https://www.youtube.com/umbracoffee) series are good sources.

Remember, your audience may not actually know that much about Umbraco so you might need to take some time to explain things in a way that will keep everyone engaged. Saying "Niels Hartvig, the founder of Umbraco" is a much a friendlier approach than just referring to him as "Niels". This is appropriate for in person meetups too of course, it's something we need to keep reminding ourselves!

## Tools

Zoom is the defacto choice for running a virtual meetup. The free accounts have a limit of 40 minutes, whereas 'pro' accounts can host up to 100 attendees without time limitations.

Umbraco HQ have an 'pro' account that can be used for running meetups. Reach out to Ilham Boulghallat on the community Slack around 1 week in advance of your meetup if you would like to use HQ's Zoom.

## Preparations

Virtual events don't have to be limited to your regular local attendees - Umbracians from all over the world can join!

Plan a date with at least a couple of weeks notice and begin promoting as soon as you can. Share your meetup on Twitter, LinkedIn, the community Slack, and other channels for the widest reach. If you don't promote your event, you aren't going to get people to attend. 

Check the meetup.com [events calendar](https://www.meetup.com/pro/umbraco) to ensure there's nothing conflicting with your chosen date and time.

### Scheduling

When creating a meeting on Zoom make sure:

- The correct date and time have been set
- The meeting has a password
- The waiting room is enabled _(advanced settings)_
- Participants are "muted on entering" _(advanced settings)_

It is important not to share your Zoom URL in the public domain! Be careful to share the link with only those you trust, and not on public social media or in the description of your meetup.

Meetup.com provides a safe way to share the link with your attendees; selecting the "Make this an online event" checkbox will reveal a "online meetup URL" textbox which is only displayed to registered attendees.

## On the day

It is a good idea to email people on the day of the meetup with the joining information, plus a reminder that they must not share the link with anyone else or post it online.

### Preparing the Zoom call

- Start the call early with the waiting room enabled so you can make sure that you and the other organisers are ready before letting everyone else in.
- Make sure that all organisers are set as 'co-hosts'. If you organise meetups on your own, ask a couple of trusted community members to co-host with you as it is so much easier to have a few of you monitoring what's going on.
- Make sure that you have disabled annotations, screen-sharing, whiteboard, and participants renaming themselves: all these tools have been used for nefarious purposes by 'Zoom bombers'. Of course if your meeting url never makes it into the public domain then you shouldn't have any problems but it is a good idea to be prepared in case it does. Do you know where the 'remove' option is just in case you need to kick someone out? Note that if you remove someone they cannot rejoin so don't try this on someone who should be there!
- It is useful for people, especially first-timers, to know who the meetup organisers are on the call. An easy way to achieve this is to add ' - organiser' to your Zoom name. Co-hosts can change their own name even if you've disabled this for participants.  
- Ideally all the organisers should be visible and aware of what's happening during the call, but if that's not possible, make sure at least one of you is at all times.

### Starting the meetup

When people join the call it can be disconcerting if nothing is happening and everyone is quiet. One option is to have started a screen-share before you let people in, with a slide welcoming people to the meetup and informing them that you'll be starting in a few minutes.

We prefer to instigate some informal chat with people as they join us. It can help to set a friendly, welcoming tone to the event. If you have lots of participants it might be easier to keep everyone else on mute and just you the organisers have a chat as people arrive.

### A friendly introduction

As part of our introduction we like to get everyone to say a quick hello, tell us their name and where they are. We've had people join from the US, South Africa and other parts of the UK so it is interesting to hear where they are joining from. Perhaps also ask people to say if it's their first time at your meetup, so you can all give a quick cheer to welcome them.

You do need to make it clear that it is a quick hello and not much more. If people start doing full introductions then it can go on far too long! You can't tell people to say hello in order, as the sequence on screen and in the participants list is different for everyone.

We find it works best when one of the organisers invites each person to speak. Without such direction you will either have silence, or people talking over each other. It's easy to miss someone out, so do remember to ask at the end if you've done that!

If you have lots of people on the call then this won't really viable, and instead you could select just a few people to talk to. Perhaps ask people to raise their hand if they're new, or from abroad, and then ask them to say hello. Of course it is completely up to you how you handle all this, but we've had some feedback that people really appreciated being invited to say something, as otherwise they would have left at the end without ever un-muting themselves.

### Helping speakers

Before you're about to hand over to your speaker, make them a co-host of the meeting so that they can share their screen. Ask your attendees to keep their videos on if they don't mind, as it helps the speakers to see engaged faces as they talk.

Usually you'll want to mute everyone before the speaker starts, it's always a good idea to tell people you're doing that so they know you've done it. Some speakers prefer having people un-muted, so it's best to check with them.

At the point you hand over to the speakers for a screen share, spot light them.  This helps attendees focus on the speaker, and helps anyone who lips read find the speaker easily to see what the speaker is saying.  It also has the benefit of attendees easily seeing the speaker demo via the camera, for example when demoing with physical devices such as Alexa.

If people have questions then it's usually easiest to ask them to post it in the Zoom chat. As the organiser you should be in charge of reading out the questions at the end, don't make the speaker scroll through the chat themselves!

### Recording

We haven't been recording the London meetups as we know this puts some people off from attending. We also want to encourage as many people to turn up as possible.

There are perhaps times where you wish to record a specific talk or segment of your meetup. Be sure to warn your attendees before you start the recording so people can switch off their video if they wish.

There is an [Umbraco Community YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCIMCVKFTnLBJPkbkIez4IzQ) that meetup videos can be published to. Find Arnold Visser on the community Slack for help with that.

### Questions

Before you start the session ask the speaker if they are happy to take questions during their talk or at the end.

Remind attendees that they can post questions to the Zoom chat if they want.  Ensure one of the meetup organisers is monitoring the vhat to ensure that all questions do get asked.

Some attendees may feel self conscious at asking a question on the meetup, so offer them the ability to ping one of the organisers to ask questions on their behalf.

Do make sure the questions and discussions stay on topic and consider nominating a meeting chair to ensure that people get an equal voice in the post talk chat.

### Finishing the meetup

It's a good idea to have a formal end to the meetup, no doubt to say some thank yous and to remind people when the next meetup is.

If you want to stay on the call and have some informal chat then make it known that people can stay on for that, but that they're welcome to leave. This stops people feeling rude if they do want to go!

## Any other tips?

If you have any other suggestions for things that have worked well on a virtual meetup we'd love to hear them: [@umbLondon](https://twitter.com/umblondon) on Twitter (DMs are open), email <hello@umblondon.co.uk>, or let [Callum](https://twitter.com/callumbwhyte), [Lotte](https://twitter.com/lottepitcher) or [Ravi](https://twitter.com/ravimotha) know (all on the community Slack). 

We're keen to get back to in person meetups when we're allowed to, but we will certainly consider adding some online meetups to our schedules...
